Add Hybrid App Tutorial (#1161)
onflow/docs: docs/tutorials/hybrid-apps/introduction.md

---
title: Introduction

> description: Learn how to use FCL with wagmi and rainbowkit to create a cross-vm app - one that is simultaneously connected to Flow EVM and Flow Cadence.

Reviewer: If this is for a meta description, it looks longer than recommended lengths.

sidebar_position: 5
keywords:
  - hybrid apps
  - cross-vm apps
  - FCL
  - wagmi
  - rainbowkit
  - viem
  - Flow EVM
  - Flow Cadence
  - cross-VM
  - multi-call
  - batch transactions
  - web3
  - dapp development
  - wallet integration
  - smart contracts
  - blockchain development
  - supercharge your EVM app with Cadence
---

Ever since the launch of Flow EVM, it's been possible to _supercharge_ your EVM apps by using Flow Cadence features and contracts. Some benefits, such as [native VRF] and inexpensive gas without compromising security are built in and either easy or automatic to use. Others, such as the ability to use [Cadence] to [structure and call EVM transactions], are powerful but complicated to configure and use. They also require developers to manage concurrent connections to both networks.

[FLIP 316] improves the [Flow Client Library (FCL)] to support cross-VM functionality between Flow EVM and Flow Cadence.

> For EVM developers, this means that you can use the familiar [wagmi], [viem], and [rainbowkit] stack you're used to, add FCL, and get features like **multi-call write** with one signature for users with a Cadence-compatible [wallet].

Reviewer: Wagmi, viem, and rainbowkit are inconsistently cased across the article

In this tutorial, you'll learn how to create a hybrid application and use some basic cross-VM features.

:::warning

The FCL functionality described in this tutorial is in alpha. Some steps may change. We'll keep the tutorial updated, but please [create an issue] or let us know on [Discord] if something isn't working for you.

:::

## Objectives

After completing this guide, you'll be able to:

- Build an app that seamlessly integrates Flow Cadence and Flow EVM connections
- Add Cadence features to your [Rainbowkit]/[wagmi]/[viem] app

> - Utilize [FCL] to enable multi-call contract writes to Flow EVM

Reviewer: This FCL link doesn't work

```bash
npm run dev
```

You'll see:

![Hybrid App Demo](hybrid-app-demo.png)

Connect with a Cadence-compatible [wallet].

:::warning

In a production app, you'll want to manage this process carefully. Non-Cadence EVM wallets may be able to connect, but they will **not** be able to use any Cadence features.

:::

## Send Batch Transactions

The first demo built into this scaffold is **multi-call contract write**.

On Flow, this isn't an unstable experimental feature - it's a demonstration of the power of EVM + Cadence.

Click `Send Batch Transaction Example` and approve the transaction. You'll see three lines appear on the page, similar to:

```
{"isPending":false,"isError":false,"txId":"b3c2b8c86e68177af04324152d45d9de9c2a118ff8f090476b3a07e0c9554912","results":[{"hash":"0x46e923a08d9008632e3782ea512c4c590d4650ba58b3e8b49628f58e6adddaa9","status":"passed","errorMessage":""},{"hash":"0x52c82dc689cd5909519f8a90d0a1ec2e74192d7603fd3b5d33f7f4d54a618a84","status":"passed","errorMessage":""}]}
```

:::tip

Currently, the Flow wallet sponsors all gas for all transactions on both testnet **and mainnet!**

:::

### Cadence Parent Transaction

> The first line is the transaction id of the Flow Cadence transaction that calls **both** of the EVM transactions. Search for it in [Testnet Cadence Flowscan].

Reviewer: Capitalize id?

Next, use some JavaScript to put 10 copies of the transaction call into the array:

```tsx
const calls: EVMBatchCall[] = Array.from({ length: 10 }, () => ({
  address: clickToken.address,
  abi: clickToken.abi as Abi,
  functionName: 'mintTo',
  args: [coa?.address],
}));
```

Click the button again and **manually** refresh page once the transaction hashes appear.

**You just minted 10 tokens from 10 transactions with one signature!**

## Conclusion

In this tutorial, you reviewed the demo starter for building hybrid applications that utilize a common EVM stack and integrate with Flow Cadence. You then added functionality to interface with another contract that mints ERC-20 tokens. Finally, you supercharged your app by using the power of Cadence for EVM multi-call contract writes.

Now that you have completed the tutorial, you should be able to:

- Build an app that seamlessly integrates Flow Cadence and Flow EVM connections
- Add Cadence features to your [Rainbowkit]/[wagmi]/[viem] app

> - Utilize [FCL] to enable multi-call contract writes to Flow EVM

Reviewer: This FCL link doesn't work

---
title: Introduction

> description: Learn how to use FCL with wagmi and rainbowkit to create a hybrid app - one that is simultaneously connected to Flow EVM and Flow Cadence.

Reviewer: I'm not sure "hybrid app" is clear enough as to what it is. Think we need a better short name.

sidebar_position: 5
keywords:
  - hybrid apps
  - FCL
  - wagmi
  - rainbowkit
  - viem
  - Flow EVM
  - Flow Cadence
  - cross-VM
  - multi-call
  - batch transactions
  - web3
  - dapp development
  - wallet integration
  - smart contracts
  - blockchain development
  - supercharge your EVM app with Cadence
---

Ever since the launch of Flow EVM, it's been possible to _supercharge_ your EVM apps by using Flow Cadence features and contracts. Some benefits, such as [native VRF] and inexpensive gas without compromising security are built in and either easy or automatic to use. Others, such as the ability to use [Cadence] to [structure and call EVM transactions], are powerful but complicated to configure and use. They also require developers to manage concurrent connections to both networks.

[FLIP 316] improves the [Flow Client Library (FCL)] to support cross-VM functionality between Flow EVM and Flow Cadence.

> For EVM developers, this means that you can use the familiar [wagmi], [viem], and [rainbowkit] stack you're used two, add FCL, and get features like **multi-call write** with one signature for users with a Cadence-compatible [wallet].

Reviewer: "you're used to"

### Solidity and Cadence Smart Contract Development

Apps using the hybrid approach can interact with both [Cadence] and [Solidity] smart contracts. You don't need to be an expert in either of these, but it's helpful to be familiar with how smart contracts work in at least one of these languages.

### Onchain App Frontends

We're assuming you're familiar with [wagmi], [viem], and [rainbowkit]. If you're coming from the Cadence, you might want to take a quick look at the getting started guides for these platforms. They're all excellent and will rapidly get you up to speed on how the EVM world commonly connects their apps to their contracts.

## Getting Started

For this tutorial, we'll be starting from a fork of the [FCL + RainbowKit + Wagmi Integration Demo] built by the team.

Fork the repo so you can push your work freely to your own copy, then follow the setup instructions.

> For _Step 3_, you'll want to clone and build FCL [FCL-JS] in a folder in the same level as where you cloned your fork of the hybrid app starter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Step 3, clone and build FCL [FCL-JS] in a folder in the same level as where you cloned your fork of the hybrid app starter.
```

:::info

Manually building FCL locally is a temporary step during alpha. In the future, you'll just install the package.

:::

```bash
/src/                   # Any parent folder
  ├── my-project/       # Your project
  ├── fcl-js/           # The cloned FCL-JS repo
```

> Running the command **from the root of your hybrid-app project folder**, the you can clone it with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From **the root of your hybrid-app project folder**, run the following command to clone it:
```

    execute {
        for i, call in calls {
            let to = call["to"] as! String
            let data = call["data"] as! String
            let gasLimit = call["gasLimit"] as! UInt64
            let value = call["value"] as! UInt

            let result = self.coa.call(
                to: EVM.addressFromString(to),
                data: data.decodeHex(),
                gasLimit: gasLimit,
                value: EVM.Balance(attoflow: value)
            )

            if mustPass {
                assert(
                  result.status == EVM.Status.successful,
                  message: "Call index ".concat(i.toString()).concat(" to ").concat(to)
                    .concat(" with calldata ").concat(data).concat(" failed: ")
                    .concat(result.errorMessage)
                )
            }
        }
    }
```

In this case, it's checking that the caller of the Cadence transaction has permission to control to the EVM account, which is built in for [Cadence Owned Accounts]. The `execute` phase then iterates through the EVM transactions and uses the Cadence accounts own permissions to sign the EVM transactions.

> The loop also handles a check for the optional flag to cancel all of the transactions if any one of them fails. **In other words, you could set up a 20 transaction arbitrage attempt and unwind everything if it fails at any step!**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The loop also includes an optional flag to cancel all transactions if any fail. **In other words, you could set up a 20 transaction arbitrage attempt and unwind everything if it fails at any step!**
```

  },
  {
    // Call approve() function (ERC20 style) on the same token contract.
    address: '0xd3bF53DAC106A0290B0483EcBC89d40FcC961f3e', // Replace with your actual token contract address if needed.
    abi: [
      {
        inputs: [
          { name: 'spender', type: 'address' },
          { name: 'value', type: 'uint256' },
        ],
        name: 'approve',
        outputs: [{ name: '', type: 'bool' }],
        stateMutability: 'nonpayable',
        type: 'function',
      },
    ],
    functionName: 'approve',
    args: [
      '0x2E2Ed0Cfd3AD2f1d34481277b3204d807Ca2F8c2', // Spender address.
      BigInt('1000000000000000000'), // Approve 1 token (assuming 18 decimals).
    ],
  },
];
```

It's called with the `useBatchTransaction` hook via the `sendBatchTransaction(calls)` function.

## Code Evaluator

The demo also has an embedded code evaluator that you can use to experiment with snippets of code from `fcl` or `wagmi`.

For example:

```tsx
const user = await fcl.currentUser().snapshot();
return user.addr;
```

Will return your Cadence address. This snippet:

```tsx
const block = await fcl.block();

> console.log(block);

Reviewer: Can remove this

return block.height;
```

Returns the current Cadence VM block number.

> ## Calling Your own Contract

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Calling Your Own Contract
```

    }
  }, [writeError]);

  useEffect(() => {
    if (receiptError) {
      console.error(receiptError);
      setAwaitingResponse(false);
    }
  }, [receiptError]);

  return (
    <div className="card gap-1">
      {account.address && (
        <div className="mb-4">
          <TheButton
            writeContract={writeContract}
            awaitingResponse={awaitingResponse}
            setAwaitingResponse={setAwaitingResponse}
          />
        </div>
      )}
      <br />
      {<TopTenDisplay reloadScores={reload} setReloadScores={setReload} />}
    </div>
  );
}
```

Then, import and add `<Content />` to `page.tsx`:

```tsx
return (
  <>
    <div style={{ display: 'flex', justifyContent: 'flex-end', padding: 12 }}>
      <ConnectButton />
    </div>
    <h3>Flow Address: {flowAddress}</h3>
    <h3>EVM Address: {coa?.address}</h3>
    <br />
    <button onClick={() => sendBatchTransaction(calls)}>
      Send Batch Transaction Example
    </button>
    {<p>{JSON.stringify({ isPending, isError, txId, results })}</p>}
    <Content />
  </>
);
```

You'll now see the button and scoreboard from the contract. Test it out and earn a few points!

![scores](scores.png)

> ## Supercharge your EVM App With Cadence

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Supercharge Your EVM App With Cadence
```
